#### Friday, December 2nd 2016

## 004: grep Matchers

The GNU version of `grep` offers four different matchers:

1. Fixed strings (`grep -F, --fixed-strings`): There are no meta characters
in this mode, every character is interpreted literally.
2. Basic regular expressions (BRE, `grep -G, --basic-regexp`): This
is the default mode of `grep`: Meta characters need to be escaped using
backslashes. `a{1,2}` would be interpreted literally as the string `a{1,2}`,
while `a\{1,2\}` stands for _one or two small letters 'a'_.
3. Extended regular expressions (ERE, `grep -E, --extended-regexp`): This is
the default mode of `egrep`: Meta characters, such as those in quantifiers,
don't need to be escaped. There are also shortcuts for some commonly used
quantifiers `?` (zero or one, instead of `{0,1}`), `*` (zero, one or many;
instead of `{0,}`) and `+` (one or more; instead of `{1,}`).
4. Perl-compatible regular expressions (PCRE, `grep -P, --perl-regexp`):
This one offers the most powerful features, but many features are
experimental. Therefore I won't be using them ‒ unless I program in Perl.

I'm mostly interested in extended regular expressions, because they are
more powerful (and easier to write) than basic regular expressions. Fixed
strings might come in handy once in a while, for example when searching for
strings containing meta characters such as `^` (beginning of a line) and `$`
(end of a line).

    $ cat > script.sh
    sed 's/^hello$/hi/g'
    $ grep -F '^hello$' script.sh
    sed 's/^hello$/hi/g'

If I'd use basic or extended regular expressions here, the caret and the
dollar sign needed to be escaped in order to match the same line:

    $ grep -G '\^hello\$' script.sh
    sed 's/^hello$/hi/g'

Not escaping the caret and the dollar sign would not match any line, because
it would be interpreted as a line beginning or ending, respectively.

    $ grep -G $foo script.sh

`grep -G` might come in handier than `grep -E` for the same reason: when
searching for literal characters braces, for example, which needed to be
escaped using extended regular expressions.
