#### Sunday, December 4th 2016

## 005: Automatically Link to Individual Articles

In order to link to a specific article on this page, rather than just to
this page as a whole, I implemented a `sed` script. It is executed after the
transformation from `markdown` to HTML has taken place. Here's how the script
`add_link.sed` looks like:

    s/<h2>\([[:digit:]]\+\):/\
    <h2 id="\1">\
    <a href="https:\/\/patrickbucher.github.io\
    \/starting-over\/index.html#\1">\1<\/a>:/

Let's break it apart. The script consists of a single substitute command,
which looks like this:

    s/regex/replacement/flags

There are four parts divided by slashes. The initial `s` stands for
"substitute". The first expression `regex` is a regular expression to be
searched for in the input. The second expression `replacement` defines the
value the matched regular expression is to be replaced with. At the end,
`flags` could be provided.

It's not that easy to distinguish those parts in the command above, because
it contains additional (escaped) slashes, and the parts heavily vary in
size. (The command also has been spread over four lines; a line does not
correspond to the parts mentioned, however.) Here's the regular expression:

    <h2>\([[:digit:]]\+\):

This expression looks rather cryptic, but its meaning becomes clear, when
one looks at a sample input line to be matched:

    <h2>004: grep Matchers</h2>

We have a level two headline (`<h2>`) consisting of a number and a textual
description, separated by a colon and a space. Only the leading number, rather
than the whole title, should be converted to a hyperlink. Unsurprisingly,
the expression starts by matching `<h2>`. `[[:digit:]]` matches _one_
digit; with the `+` quantifier added, it matches _one or many_ digits. In
order to be interpreted as a meta character, rather than literally, the `+`
modifier needs to be escaped by a leading backslash. Matching _one or many_
digits thus becomes: `[[:digit:]]\+`.

The matched digits will be used for three purposes in the output:

1. As an anchor to identify the title,
2. as a part of the hyperlink
3. and as the text shown for the hyperlink.

Therefore, the matched digits are captured inside a _group_ using parentheses:
`([[:digit:]]\+)`. Those parentheses must be interpreted as meta characters,
rather than literally, so they need to be escaped, too: `\([[:digit:]]\+\)`.

Before dissecting the replacement expression, let's take a look at the
intended output:

    <h2 id="004">
    <a href="https://patrickbucher.github.io/starting-over/index.html#004">
    004</a>: grep Matchers</h2>

(The title had to be spread over four lines because it would not fit
horizontally on this page.) Most of the output is also contained in the
`sed` replacement expressions. The article number, which is used three times
as described above, is included with a back reference to the first group
matched `\1` (there's only one matched group in this example). Furthermore,
line breaks and slashes (such as in `http://` and `</a>`) had to be escaped
using backslashes (resulting in `http:\/\/` and `<\/a>`), leading to this
somewhat convoluted replacement expression:

    <h2 id="\1">\
    <a href="https:\/\/patrickbucher.github.io\
    \/starting-over\/index.html#\1">\1<\/a>:

The `sed` command is ended by a slash, no flags have been used.

PS: For the date indications on top of every article, I should consider
using superscript for the ordinal numbers, such as _December 4<sup>th</sup>_
rather than _December 4th_. A lot of small scripting tasks come along,
when one starts writing a fully automated diary or blog, which is exactly
the purpose of _Starting Over_.
