#### Tuesday, December 6th 2016

## 007: Tiny little improvements

Today, I did a couple of tiny little improvements. The `awk` script I've
written yesterday had some minor problems. I did use `sub` rather than `gsub`
to perform the replacements of three full stops with an ellipsis and two
hyphens with an n-dash. So only the first occurrence per line was replaced.

I also switched from n-dashes to m-dashes. The latter must not be surrounded
by spaces. I decided to replace the three existing occurrences manually. I
used this command to find all the occurrences:

    grep -l ' -- ' articles/*.md

The parameter `-l` displays the files for which the pattern matches, rather
than the matching lines.

I also discovered a minor glitch in the version I used before. In article
[004: grep Matchers](#004), I've written down some long form parameters,
such as `--basic-regexp` and `--extended-regexp`. Those two hyphens had been
replaced with a dash, which clearly doesn't work in the shell. So I had to
extend my `typography.awk` script even further, so that it only replaces
two hyphens between alphanumeric characters (now with an _m_-dash). Here's
how the modified lines look like now:

    !/^([[:space:]]+|####)/ {
        # quote replacements omitted
        gsub(/\.\.\./, "…");
        $0 = gensub(/([[:alnum:]]+)--([[:alnum:]]+)/, "\\1—\\2", "g");
        print;
    }

I also discovered that the `sed` supports extended regular expressions by
invoking it with the option `-r`. Doing so makes the `add_link.sed` script
a bit more readable, because parentheses to capture groups and quantifiers
no longer need to be escaped. Here's the new version:

    s/<h2>([[:digit:]]+):/\
    <h2 id="\1">\
    <a href="https:\/\/patrickbucher.github.io\
    \/starting-over\/index.html#\1">\1<\/a>:/

These are tiny little improvements, after all, but as I said: getting ahead
with tiny little baby steps is still better than being totally stuck.
