#### Sunday, December 11th 2016

## 009: In the Midst of the Prelude

As I've already written, the last month of 2016 is supposed to be some kind
of a [prelude](#002) for the new way I'm going to work on my projects. How
is it going so far?

### Literature: _Homo Faber_ by Max Frisch

I haven't been reading that much for the last two weeks. I'm now on page 64
(of 202), so I need to read a bit more.

_Homo Faber_ is subtitled as a report. _Walter Faber_, who works as
an Engineer, tells the story of his life. Travelling in the Americas,
many unexpected things happen to him. He gets seated next to _Herbert_,
the brother of his old friend _Joachim_, in an airplane. On their flight to
Mexico, an engine breaks down and they need to do an emergency landing in
the desert of Mexico.

During their stay in the desert, Walter and Joachim get to know each other.
Herbert wants to travel to his brother Joachim, who owns and operates a tobacco
plantation in Guatemala. Walter decides to join Herbert. After a long journey,
they discover that Joachim had hung himself.

Walter Faber also reports on the relationship he had to Hanna, a half-jew,
in the early 1930s. She got pregnant, but didn't want to marry him. He
thought that she will have an abortion.

Now Walter Faber is in a relationship with _Ivy_, but wants to give up their
common apartment in New York.

(I really had trouble writing about the first 64 pages, and I also had to
look up some of the details. This is exactly how I should _not_ be reading. If
I'd read _well_ so far, I'd be remembering everything know.)

### Programming: the `grep` Command

Honestly, I didn't work with `grep` that much as I wanted to. I'm now aware
about its [different matchers](#004) and the `-l` flag. However, I discovered
that knowing those modes is also helpful for other tools, such as `sed`,
which uses basic regular expressions by default, but is also capable of
using extended regular expressions when invoked with the `-r` flag.

Regular expressions have to be learned as a fundamental concept (of UNIX),
not just as some syntax used in many (UNIX) utilities. This discovery is
more valuable than knowing every arcane flag of the `grep` command.

However, there are some more flags I really need to know in order to work
effectively and efficiently with `grep`, such as:

- `-c` to count matches,
- `-e` to work with multiple patterns,
- `-f` to work with entire files containing patterns,
- `-h` and `-H` to add or omit the filename for each match,
- `-i` for case-_in_sensitive matching,
- `-n` to prefix matching lines with a number,
- `-o` to only output the matching part,
- `-r` to process a directory (containing text files) recursively,
- `-v` to invert the sense of matching,
- `-w` and `-x` to only match whole words or lines.

For the other flags listed by the `grep` man page, I don't see any use at
the moment, so I'm going to leave those away. For the rest of this month,
I'll get to know the ones listed above.

### Russian: Aspect Pairs of the 50 Most Common Russian Verbs

I've found a [frequency
list](http://masterrussian.com/vocabulary/common_verbs.htm) of the most common
Russian verbs. I've written down the first 50 of them to flash cards in their
aspect pairs. Then I've written their German translation (or translations)
on the other side.

When learning with those flash cards, I was able to translate around two
thirds of them the first time, so I can focus on the other third for the next
two weeks. At the end of the month, I can put the stack of those fifty cards
back together and learn them all at once, which should not take too much time.

I'm going to use those cards also next year when I'm learning verb conjugations
in a more systematic manner. I hope that using those 50 verbs, all categories
and groups are already covered.

### Summary

I've already achieved a lot, and it didn't seem to be hard work at any
time. The most important thing is that I've been working on this page a
lot. I have already written productive code in `sed` and `awk`, which I
didn't do anytime before.

On the down side, I really have to read in a more focused manner. Or maybe
I have to read everything twice in order to make it stick.
