#### Thursday, December 15th 2016

## 010: For How Long?

In my [initial post](#001), I had the idea to assign half a year to the things
I want to do in each of the three areas I care about the most (literature,
programming and Russian). Sticking to one thing already proved to be hard
for one month--even for the first two weeks I tried to stick to it so far.

- Literature: I've been reading parts of _Homo Faber_ and nothing else.
- Programming: I got to learn the `grep` command with its modes and some of
its flags. But I worked much more with `sed` and `awk`, which of course also
helped me to understand regular expressions and hence the usage of `grep`
better. But I didn't invest much time in playing around with `grep`.
- Russian: I've been working with flash cards. I didn't put in a lot of effort.

In literature and Russian, I was focused insofar that I didn't tackle
other books or topics. This is probably due to the fact that I have a lot
of other things going on for my studies at the moment. In programming,
I wasn't really focused.

I thought to tackle regular expressions from January to June 2017. Now I'm
thinking about Go, `git` and Java 8 again. Not touching any of those for
six months will be quite hard.

After my first month, the [prelude](#002), I should consider the time frame
for the next block. Doubling the length might be a good idea. Or adding one
month at a time. Or maybe I should re-consider the time frame for the next
block during the preceding block. I might even have to put one or two buffer
weeks in between to review the last and plan the next block.

I recently ordered the book [Learn git in a Month of
Lunches](https://www.manning.com/books/learn-git-in-a-month-of-lunches).
Working through--not just reading--one chapter should take one hour, the
author says. Since I already have some experience with `git`, it might take
even less time, at least at the beginning.

I think it's OK to consider different time frames for my upcoming
projects. It's only important to stick to those plans afterwards. Half a year
to read one book might be too long for some books (say, _Homo Faber_), and
too short for others (say, Gibbon's _Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_).

In December, I'll be both thinking about _what_ projects I'm going to tackle
first in 2017, but also _how much time_ I'm going to assign to those.
