#### Thursday, December 22nd 2016

## 011: Being Realistic

The title of the aforementioned book _Learn git in a Month of Lunches_ made me
think. Half a year might not be the proper duration for every project,
one month
might be enough for some.

So I thought to assign January 2017 to that book. But there's a problem: In
January I have my term exams, and I'll have to learn for those, which
will leave
little time for own projects. Having one relatively unproductive month is not
that much of a problem when you have six of them for one project.  It is,
however, when you only have one.

I'm thinking of focusing entirely on the term exams in January. The last
exam will be exactly on January 31st. However, after the math exam, there won't
be that much to prepare. And I'm not willing to invest all of my time in
learning for the exams, because there are some topics I'm not remotely
interested in. Here I'm going to be pragmatic: I'll learn what I need to pass
the exams safely, but I don't strive for excellency.

Instead of working on certain additional projects in January, I just could work
on my habits, so that I'll be in a better mental shape in February for upcoming
projects. I could try to:

- sleep for eight or more hours every night by trying to get to bed at 10
  o'clock p.m.
- get up early (if I manage to go to sleep early)
- walk for at least one hour a day (I'm already doing on the days I'm going
  to university, which I don't have to do in January.)
- not buying things I don't need (more books, new electronic devices,
  superfluous groceries)

This will leave me more relaxed and, hopefully, I'll be able to learn in a more
focused way.

PS: I've been reading another third of _Homo Faber_, but didn't work with
`grep`
and my Russian flash cards.
