#### Sunday, December 25th 2016

## 012: The Last Thing Before Sleep

Two nights ago, something strange happened.

I was reading _Homo Faber_ from Max Frisch. _Walter Faber_, the hero of that
short novel, met _Elisabeth_ on a ship from New York to France. Hi didn't know
that she was his daughter, he didn't even know that he had a daughter, because
he thought _Hanna_, his former girlfriend, had an abortion.

Walter Faber and Elisabeth met again in Paris and then travelled together to
Rome. He wanted to marry her, but she neither denied nor accepted. They
continued their journey to Athens, where Hanna, Elisabeth's mother, lives.

When Walter was swimming and Elisabeth sleeping at the beach, a snake bit her.
She also fell down and got severely hurt when landing, but Walter didn't really
notice, because the snake bite seemed more important at that time.

He managed to bring her to a hospital in Athens somehow, where he met
again with
Hanna. Elisabeth died on the next day, but not from the snake bite, but
from her
neck injury.

I closed the book and quickly fell to sleep. After a couple of hours, I woke up
and suddenly some thoughts about _Homo Faber_ came to my mind:

- The whole book seems to be about the antagonism between heart and mind;
  between feelings and thoughts. Walter Faber is the engineer, the thinker;
  Hanna--and Ivy and Elisabeth--are rather artists and feelers. Walter was
  taking care of the snake bite close to Elisabeth's heart, but didn't
  notice her
  injury next to hear brain. The snake bite wasn't dangerous at all. Something
  (it might be love) made Walter act in irrational ways, which marks his
  transition from thinking to feeling, at least in this situation. He no longer
  lives up to his higly rational standards.
- Elisabeth had three little wounds from the snake bite. Not two, not four.
  Snakes have two long poisonous teeth on the upper jaw and two shorter
  counterparts on the lower jaw. Why three wounds? It's hardly a co-incidence,
  I
  think it stands as a symbol for the deadly reunion of the three, which
  was not
  supposed to happen.

I didn't care that much for _Homo Faber_ up to then. But after that episode, I
was thinking about the novel very intensively. Hadn't I read that important
part
of the book directly before falling asleep, I might not have really cared about
it either.

This should teach me a lesson: It's not only important to work intensely and
focused on something, it is just as important to give the brain some rest
afterwards. And sleeping is by far the best way of resting for the brain.
Resting doesn't mean doing nothing, it means: don't occupy the brain with
external stimuli, but let it work on the information it already has.

I already _knew_ that, of course, but now I really _felt_ it.
