#### Tuesday, December 27th 2016

## 013: Some `grep` Options

In order to demonstrate some `grep` options, I'll be working with this test
file `test.txt`:

    This file is a test file.
    I use it to work with grep.
    It has three lines and nothing else.

To match all the letters _i_, `grep` can be invoked like this:

    $ grep 'i' test.txt
    This file is a test file.
    I use it to work with grep.
    It has three lines and nothing else.

The whole file `test.txt` will be printed as a result, because every line
contains the small letter _i_, and grep outputs the whole line of a match by
default.

Using the `-o` option (`--only-matching`), only the matching parts are printed,
which are a couple of _i_s:

    $ grep -o 'i' test.txt
    i
    i
    i
    i
    i
    i
    i
    i

Adding the `-n` option (`--line-number`) also outputs the line number of
the matched _i_s:

    $ grep -no 'i' test.txt
    1:i
    1:i
    1:i
    1:i
    2:i
    2:i
    3:i
    3:i

The `-c` option (`--count`) counts the number of matches and outputs a sum
instead of the matches.

    $ grep -c 'i' test.txt
    3

Using the `-c` option together with `-n` or `-o` is pointless.

The capital letter _T_ only matches for one of the three lines:

    $ grep 'T' test.txt
    This file is a test file.

The `-i` option (`--ignore-case`), however, ignores case distinctions and hence
prints all three lines, which all contain the letter _t_:

    $ grep -i 'T' test.txt
    This file is a test file.
    I use it to work with grep.
    It has three lines and nothing else.

The effect can also be demonstrated when using `-i` and `-c` in combination:

    $ grep -c 'T' test.txt
    1
    $ grep -ic 'T' test.txt
    3

The `-v` option (`--invert-match`) inverts the sense of matching. Grepping for
_T_ in `test.txt` again with that option shows the two other lines that _don't_
contain a _T_:

    $ grep -v 'T' test.txt
    I use it to work with grep.
    It has three lines and nothing else.

This option can also be combined with `-c`, which gives the number of lines
_not_ containing a capital letter _T_:

    $ grep -cv 'T' test.txt
    2

The `-r` option (`--recursive`) makes `grep` suitable not just for files
(or keyboard input),
but for entire directories, which are processed recursively. If I wanted
to know
how often I already mentioned the novel _Homo Faber_ in my diary, I could
simply
type:

    $ grep -cr 'Homo Faber' articles/
    articles/006.md:0
    articles/012.md:3
    articles/013.md:2
    articles/008.md:0
    articles/010.md:2
    articles/011.md:1
    articles/007.md:0
    articles/009.md:2
    articles/001.md:0
    articles/002.md:1
    articles/005.md:0
    articles/004.md:0
    articles/.013.md.swp:2
    articles/003.md:0

This tells me how often I mentioned _Homo Faber_ _by file_. If I'm
interested in
a grand total instead, I'd better use `grep` in combination with `cat`:

    $ cat articles/* | grep -c 'Homo Faber'
    11

The attentive reader might already have noticed that the two matches from the
`vim` swap file `.013.md.swp` are not counted using the second command. It will
be an interesting exercise for me to find out why this is the case.

As we have seen, `grep` only prints the file name when it is working on more
than one file at a time. This, however, is the default behaviour, it could be
overridden using the `-h` option (`--no-filename`) or the `-H` option
(`--with-filename`), respectively:

    $ grep -H 'i' test.txt
    test.txt:This file is a test file.
    test.txt:I use it to work with grep.
    test.txt:It has three lines and nothing else.

    $ grep -hcr 'Homo Faber' articles/
    0
    3
    5
    0
    2
    1
    0
    2
    0
    1
    0
    0
    5
    0

I still have to find a use-case for those two options. Omitting the file names
might come in handy in the latter example when trying to sum up a grand
total of
occurrences.

The `-w` option (`--word-regexp`) only matches the given pattern when it
occurs as an entire word. That saves the user from creating complicated
expressions for the same purpose (line breaks, tabs spaces, full stops etc. can
all be used as a word boundary and must be considered accordingly).

    $ grep -w 'I' test.txt
    I use it to work with grep.

Notice that the line containing the word "It" wasn't matched, because the
pattern "I" isn't matched _as an entire word_ there.

The `-x` option (`--line-regexp`) only matches the given pattern for entire
lines, thus saving the user from surrounding the pattern manually with `^`
(beginning of a line) and `$` (ending of a line). It makes the regular
expression a bit smaller, doesn't really solve a problem in my opinion.

    $ grep  '^This file is a test file.$'
    This file is a test file.

    $ grep -x 'This file is a test file.'
    This file is a test file.

The `-e` option (`--regexp`) can be used when matching multiple patterns, with
one pattern after every `-e` flag:

    $ grep -e 'file' -e 'work' test.txt
    This file is a test file.
    I use it to work with grep.

The patterns are matched using _or_ logic: every line matches one or more
patterns is displayed. This could also be written like this, using extended
regular expressions (don't mix up `-e` and `-E`):

    $ grep -E '(file|work)' test.txt
    This file is a test file.
    I use it to work with grep.

An _and_ logic can be implemented when piping multiple `grep` calls, applying
them as a filter. Here's `test2.txt`:

    a b
    b c
    c a

Let's first match all lines containing the letter _a_, then all lines
containing
the letter _b_. Afterwards, let's match only the lines that _both_ contain the
latter _a_ and the letter _b_:

    $ grep 'a' test2.txt
    a b
    c a

    $ grep 'c' test2.txt
    b c
    c a

    $ grep 'a' test2.txt | grep 'c'
    c a

When using expressions that are tedious to type afresh every time, the `-f`
option (`--file`) option might come in handy. All the patterns to be matched
(in
the aforementioned _or_ logic) can be put inside a file (`patterns.txt`) and
then be re-used:

    $ cat > patterns.txt
    file
    work

    $ grep -f patterns.txt test.txt
    This file is a test file.
    I use it to work with grep.

This has exactly the same effect as:

    $ grep -e 'file' -e 'work' test.txt

Those are all the `grep` options [I wanted to get to know](#009) in December. I
am not an expert with `grep` yet, but now I feel fairly comfortable when using
it. This is a solid foundation for working more intensively with regular
expressions.
