#### Sunday, January 1st 2017

## 014: After the Prelude

More than one month ago, I [decided](#002) to focus on three things in December:

- Literature: read _Homo Faber_ by Max Frisch
- Programming: get to know the `grep`-command and its options
- Russian: learn the infinitive aspect pairs of the most common 50 Russian verbs

I've read _Homo Faber_ once. I didn't care much about the novel until I once
read a couple of pages directly [before falling asleep](#012). After waking up,
I've been thinking about those pages intensely. However, I didn't re-read
anything, which means that the novel didn't excite me. So I didn't read deeply,
just superficially. I succeeded formally, but don't feel very good about it.
Maybe I've picked the wrong novel.

I didn't use `grep` a lot. But I've learned a good deal about regular expressions
and the tools that make use of it, such as `sed` and `awk`. I've also created an RSS
feed, which taught me some important lessons about the `<pre>` tag and XML's
`CDATA`. I've also written articles on `grep`: about its [matchers](#004) and
its [most important options](#013). I'm now feeling comfortable using `grep`.

I've spent little time learning the infinitive aspect pairs of the 50 most
common Russian verbs. I already knew a lot of them before, but nonetheless, I
still cannot write all of them correctly in one sitting when learning them with
flash cards. Creating the flash cards will be important to systematize my
approach of verb learning (by putting them into classes and groups). Working on
my [translation
exercise](https://patrickbucher.github.io/russisch/50-russkich-tekstov.html)
maybe would have had the better effect on my motivation.

How am I going to continue? In January, I'll [study for my exams](#011). So I
won't set any other goals. But I want to try out a new approach for constant
improvements.

### Asking Questions

Whenever a question or a little problem comes to my mind, I'll write it down in
a tiny A7 notebook, which I'll have to carry around with me all the time. If I
don't know how to translate a word to Russian, how to handle something using a
shell script or have problems remembering details about a novel--I'll write that
down _as a question_ and won't look it up on my smartphone. Whenever I have an
idle moment at home, I'll pick up that little notebook and start to work on one
question. Maybe I'll also write something on this page about the answer I've
found. How could this be helpful?

First, I'll no longer forget to solve little problems that bug me. It's very
annoying to stumble upon a problem, being unable to solve it in that moment,
forgetting about it and stumble upon _the same problem again_ afterwards.

Second, It will teach me to _ask questions_ rather than walking around with lots
of _issues_ and _problems_ in my mind. What's the difference?

- _Problem_: I don't know how to do _X_ in `git`. I really don't know `git` very
  well. I really need to learn `git`. I don't have time to learn `git` now,
  because I have to sit here at the university and listen to this boring stuff,
  I'm already getting a headache...
- _Question_: How can I do _X_ in `git`? It must be possible somehow. Of course
  somebody else had a similar problem before. Should I ask a friend or look for
  a solution on _Stack Overflow_? Maybe I should open a thread on my own. Or
  maybe better look it up in a book or in the manpages?

Even though the term _problem_ isn't negatively connoted in the language of
engineers and programmers, it always points to some kind of _lack_; to something
that isn't good or that is missing. The term _question_, however, always _asks_
for an answer or a solution. It implies that there _is_ an answer or solution,
which just has to be found.

So I'll be trying to find many questions--and answers to them.
