#### Saturday, February 11th 2017

## 015: After a Break

I didn't write anything for more than a month. The reason is that I didn't work
on my personal projects during that time. I had [exams](#012) to study for,
which didn't leave much time (and will power) for other things. The last exam
was on February 1st, and I already had ideas what I wanted to achieve in
February. But instead I relaxed for a couple of days and decided to not set any
goals for February. The next term begins in a bit more than one week, so it's
good to not have too many side projects with goals and deadlines at the moment.

However, I started reading and working through the book _Learn Git in a Month of
Lunches_. I thought to write a short summary for every chapter on this page, but
instead I'm putting together [one document about
`git`](https://github.com/patrickbucher/docs/tree/master/git) as I'm working
through the book. This page is not the right container for writing long
documentation, or at least not for looking up information, which is the point of
technical documentation. This page is supposed to document general insights
about my learning process.

One thing I did very well as a very young IT apprentice and student was writing
documentation. When I was learning Visual Basic by working through a book, I put
together a Visual Basic tutorial besides. We were also allowed to use
documentation for the final exams in subjects like programming, networking and data
bases. Five friends joined me in the effort to summarize everything we needed to
know for those exams. I coordinated the whole process, and at the end of it, we
not only had a great reference to pass the exams easily, but during the process
I learned so much that I did _not even once_ need to look up information during
the final exams. Learning by summarizing was my approach.

Unfortunately, I abandoned that approach some years ago. It's probably due to my
perfectionism and compulsive orderliness (which got worse in recent years) that
made it more difficult to finish such projects. Instead of succinctly
summarizing the things I learned, I tried to write documentation to be
understood by somebody totally alien to the subject. That's what the books I'm
reading are for. It's not the purpose of the summaries I write about them. I was
trying to write for my self that didn't read the book yet, but I should be
writing for my self that has read and understood the book and just needs a quick
refresh of the knowledge already acquired.

Fine prose and flawless grammar are indispensable in order to explain things,
but they are not the foremost quality feature for a personal reference document.
This is not an excuse for sloppy style, bad grammar and bad spelling! I only
should spend less time trying to cast every bit of information into a nicely
written paragraph, but instead try to reduce prose and optimize the text for
fast lookup. Personal documentation is not for reading, but for looking things
up--and a vehicle for the learning process.

Dropping perfectionism means not trying to write a conclusive summary about a
subject or a book, but to just compile its essential information. I also no
longer will try to create perfectly looking documents, but instead try to be
more productive. So I'll write my documents in `markdown` syntax and export them
to the PDF and HTML format using `pandoc`. Those documents won't look as good as
carefully hand-crafted LaTeX documents, but still better than most of the
documentation floating around in some software companies that use Microsoft Word
for technical documentation. (I've both seen such companies and documents and
miss neither.)

So my next goal is to work through _Learn Git in a Month of Lunches_ and write a
personal summary on `git` (and not about the book).

PS: I wasn't totally unproductive in February. I finally made the effort to
change most of my passwords and now use `pass` as a password manager. It's not a
great achievement, but proofs the point that it's possible to abandon bad habits
(and weak passwords).
